Equipment
pictures of the Sun taken a day apart for about a week (available in a .zip file on
Brightspace)
tracing paper (optional), regular paper
straightedge, protractor, and collipass
NOTE: The gecnnetrical construction in this exercise is explained using the geornetrical
instrtunents listed above. This is the quicker, more straightforward option. However, if you
have the appropriate software, you are welccnne to collil)lete this exercise digitally. It is
entirely possible to complete this exercise in GIMP using tile Ineasurelnent and drawing tools.
Data Collection
NOTE: Eight high resolution images of the sunspots taken on eight consecutive
days are available on Brightspace. Download and use those for completing the
lab exercise.
You are provided with digital ililages of the Sun with one (or a few) sunspots taken by
the Solar Dynalilics Observatory, which is in geosynchronous orbit around Earth. Each of
the illiages were taken 24 hours apart over the duration of 1 week. If there is more than
one sunspot on each irnage, choose the largest for recording. The sunspot tracing and
projection diagram should be included in the data section of your report.
You will be loading up each irnage one at a tinme and using your monitor as a lightbox to
trace the position of the sunspot onto some paper. For the first image, zooni in such that
you can see the whole image including the edges. Record this zoom level to use for the rest
of the images in the sequence. It is very important that you maintain the exact same
zoom level for each of the eight images.
Figure 2: 3D representation of a sunspot moving from position A to B, along with face-on and top-down projections (left
panel), and an equivalent 2D schematic that can be produced from face-on pictures of the Sun (right panel).

rn•ace the Sunspot
The first step will be to combine the sunspot observations into a single figure so that you
can see all the positions at once. Using tracing paper may make this easier, but it is fine to
use regular printer paper. It may help to work in a dark room to increase the contrast.
l. Open the first image and adjust the zoom so that you can see both the face of the Sun
and the edges of the image. Record the zoom level somewhere so you can use it for
the rest of the images in the sequence.
2. Nleasure the size of the Sun on the monitor, then use a compass to draw a circle of
that size onto the paper. Line up this circle with the rim of the Sun on your monitor
and trace the edges of the image onto the paper so that you can accurately align the
rest of the images.
3. Trace the sunspot on the paper and repeat for the subsequent images. Once you have
traced a sunspot for each image, label the sunspot's location with the date it was
observed (see Figure 2, e.g. points A B).
4. Use a ruler to connect all the different observations of the same spot with a line crossing
east-west across the face of the Sun. This line represents the line of latitude of the
sunspot, as shown in Figure 2.

5. Measure the length of the latitude line and mark an x half way across. This location
should be approximately the center of the Sun's cross-section at this latitude.
Project the surface
Next, we will be projecting the two-dimensional line of latitude viewed face-on out to a
top-down cross-section of the solar surface (as in Figure 2).
6. Tape a new sheet of paper to the tracing paper, ensuring to line up the edge of the
new paper with your line of latitude.
7. On the new paper, place the point of the compass at the centre mark of your latitude
line and trace out a semi-circle with a diameter equal to your line of latitude. This
semi-circle represents the surface of the Sun at the latitude of the sunspot.
Holding the taped sheet up perpendicular to the tracing paper may help visualize this. For
reference, the semi-circle in the bottom of the right panel of Figure 2 if held perpendicular to
the tracing paper (in upper panel) is the same as the cross-section in the 3-D representation
of the Sun in the left panel.

Project the sunspot
To determine how far the sunspot has traveled each day, we must now project the sunspot
from the 2-D tracing paper view onto the solar surface.
8. Take a ruler and draw perpendicular lines, starting from each sunspot and ending at
the semi-circle arc (ensure that your lines are all perpendicular to the latitude line;
your TA will guide you on the best method to draw these).
9. Once you have the sunspot positions marked on the curved solar surface, draw a new
set of lines connecting each sunspot to the centre of the Sun at this latitude (previously
marked with an x)

Measure the angles of rotation
We need to measure the angular distance the sunspot has been displaced on the surface of
the Sun between each 24-hour snapshot in order to determine how many days it takes the
sun to rotate.
10. Using a protractor, measure the angles of each sunspot on the solar surface. It is better
to keep the protractor fixed, and measure the angles of all the positions at one time.
Write down these angles in Column 2 of Table 1.
11. Calculate the change in angle, 0 (this is the same 0 as in Figure 2), between each pair
of consecutive observations. Record your results in Column 3 of Table l.
12. Calculate the average value of 0 and its standard deviation. The standard deviation
(AO) will represent the uncertainty in your value of 0. State your answer with its
uncertainty (ie. 0 ± AO).

Calculate the synodic rotation period
In one day, we know the sunspot changes location by 0 degrees. If we assume that this
angular velocity is constant as the sunspot moves across the entire solar surface, then we
can write:
00
(360 deg)
(1)
(1 day) ¯ P [days]
With some modest rearranging, we can then solve for the rotational period (P) of the Sun.
P is therefore given as:
day)
P [days] =
00
(2)
13. Using this equation, calculate the Sun's period of rotation, P from your average change
in angle. Show your work.

Table 1: Angular displacements of a sunspot.
Date
Observed
Measured
Angle
[0]
Change in
angle
Average 0 Uncertainty:

The angular positions of a sunspot as a function of time measured from the series of images
described in Section 3. The change of angle in Column 3 is the difference between two
consecutive angles measured in Column 2. The time difference between each measurement
is I day.

14. Convert your uncertainty in angle AO from Step 12 to uncertainty in period AP by
using:
0
Show your work, and state your result for P with its associated uncertainty.
Analysis
Address the following points in the Analysis section of your lab report.
(3)

Sidereal Period
While the Sun is rotating the Earth is also moving along its orbit in the same direction, as
though it is "chasing" the sunspot. As a result, the daily change in angle as measured from
Earth will be smaller than the sidereal one. Therefore, to calculate the "true" sidereal period
of the Sun, we must add 10 to the measured daily change in angle to account for Earth's
motion.
(1) Determine the sidereal period by adding 10 to your average 0, and recalculate the
period P using equation (2).
(2) Calculate the uncertainty in the above value by using your corrected 0 and sidereal
period in equation (3) (AO will be the same). State your answer for the sidereal period
with its uncertainty.

Sunspot Size and Characteristics
(3) The diameter of the Sun is 1, 392, 500 km. Measure the diameter of your sunspot and
of the Sun on your diagram (in cm) and calculate the size of the sunspot, using the
relation below:
Photo diameter of sunspot (cm) Real diameter of sunspot (km)
(4)
Photo diameter of Sun (cm
Real diameter of Sun (km)
Some modest rearranging will allow you to determine the real diameter of the sunspot.
(4) For comparison, the diameter of the Earth is 12, 756 km. How many Earths does your
calculated sunspot size represent?
(5) You used the same assumption as Galileo during this lab, that is that sunspots are
'fixed" to the solar surface. How can you check this assumption using your diagram
and/or the pictures of the Sun provided in the lab? Some things to consider:
What would you observe if the sunspot were merely something passing between
us and the Sun vs something on the surface of the Sun?
• If the sunspot were on the surface but not fixed in position, how would that
appear?

Discussion
Your discussion should address the following in addition to the relevant points in the Lab
Report Guidelines:
What were the main assumptions you made about the Sun and sunspots that made
the exercise possible?
Report your results for the synodic and sidereal periods and their respective uncertain-
ties (P ± AP), then compare these measurements to more recent values (the sidereal
period at the solar equator is 24.5 days). Are your measurements consistent? What
changes to your data collection assumptions may improve your results?
The Sun is not a solid body so it rotates faster at its equator (no 26 day synodic
period) and slower at its poles ( > 30 day synodic period). A typical rotation period
at intermediate latitudes (no 260) is
27 days. Given this differential rotation, how
might your results change if your sunspot were located at a different latitude? Is your
estimate for the sidereal period consistent with this picture?
Why did the observation of sunspots contradict the Ptolemaic Greek cosmology? How
did the discovery of sunspots change humankind's perception of our place in the Uni-
verse?