The Plain Web - Chuck Letourneau
I actually began my career in Web accessibility because of plain language. Way back in
1995 1 was working for the Federal Government of Canada and I wanted to make a Web
site to advertise services for my clients who were employees who had disabilities Of one
sort or another. I wanted to make sure that anybody could visit my site and get the
information they needed. Because I had some doubts about whether people with certain
disabilities could use the Web I did some research and discovered a marvelous set of
guidelines developed by Dr. Gregg Vanderheiden and his crew at the University of
Wisconsin's TRACE Center. However, being a self-taught and still very amateur Web
programmer, I could barely make sense of that highly technical document. But, I needed
to understand the concepts, so I stuck to it and finally managed to figure it out. At that
point, and with some rather uncharacteristic foresight, I realized that Web accessibility
for persons with disabilities was the sort of thing that would, sooner or later, become an
issue, especially for governments. I also felt that few enough people would make the
effort to decipher the excellent, but complex and technical TRACE document. Don't
forget that in 1995 most Web developers were, like me, entirely self-taught and had got
whatever knowledge we had mostly by copying the work of others who had managed to
develop working Web sites. I felt there was a need for a "plain language" version Of the
Web accessibility guidelines to serve the average Web professional.
It turned out I was right on both counts: in the last few years governments around the
world have made it law or policy to ensure their Web sites are accessible to all their
citizens. And almost every Web master or content developer I have met demands less-
technical but still-usable documentation on the whole subject of Web accessibility. I feel
privileged to have had some role in causing the former and creating the latter. My efforts
in the young field of Web accessibility caused me to get involved with the World Wide
Web Consortium - the W3C - an industry consortium of over 400 companies whose
business involves the Internet either as technical innovators, content providers or both.
The consortium includes companies like Microsoft, IBM, Adobe, Compaq, America On-
Line, Macromedia, and so on.
In 1997, recognizing the importance of keeping the Web accessible to everyone, the W 3C
started the Web Accessibility Initiative. A bunch Of working groups were formed to
address various issues including: accessibility of content, authoring tools, browsers, Web
languages, etc. Because of my prior involvement in the field, I was asked to co-chair
(with Dr. Vanderheiden) the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines working group. Our
task was to produce, essentially, a standard that Web developers could follow to ensure
that Web sites were accessible. We did that, and published them in May of 1999. The
document outlines 14 major guidelines that developers must consider, and one of those
deals with plain language.
What's wrong with the Web?
Now I'll tell you why the Web causes problems for some people. It's not having a
disability that's the problem. Absolutely not! The biggest problem is that many Web sites
and the information on them are in a form that simply can't be used by a lot of people.
In my experience most people who have disabilities are quite capable Of reading and
understanding. The difference is that they may read or comprehend differently from
people without "print-handicaps". A person who is blind may not be able to see my Web
page, but that's not a problem if the information is converted to spoken form or perhaps
Braille. A person who is deaf or hard of hearing may get nothing from an audio clip ofa
politician's speech, but that barrier disappears if I provide a text-transcript of the speech,
or visual captioning.
What if my visitor can't read... perhaps because ofa reading disability, perhaps illiteracy,
or simply doesn't read the language Of my site? Well, the text-to-speech technology used
by someone who is blind will work just as well here. Similarly, someone who can read
the language but has difficulty comprehending the spoken word could behefit from
having equivalent textual content,
But a far more common problem is that a lot of the content published on the Web is
simply incomprehensible: and not just to people who have cognitive disabilities, or
educational or literacy limitations. I am most familiar with government Web sites and,
well... do I really have to say anything to you folks about the quality of the majority of
public sector content? But, given the nature and background of most Web content
providers, I suppose this is not surprising: few are professional writers, and fewer still are
plain language professionals.
PLAIN Language guidelines and checkpoints
Most of the WCAG guidelines are intended to overcome technological barriers faced by
people with certain functional limitations. How can we make text available to someone
who can't see? How can we make audio content available to someone who can't hear?
How can we make it possible to surf the Web for someone who can't use a mouse? Those
are all pretty easy in one sense. But the question Of how to make the content or topic Of a
document understandable by someone who for whatever reason doesn't understand it is
not, in my experience, a technological question.
From the beginning, we realized that we had two problems: we had to identify and
overcome the technological barriers to using the Web (and we have, by and large, done
so) and we had to address the barriers to understanding. Even the very first guidelines
made some mention Of the need for "plain language". Granted, we were most concerned
with ensuring that Web content was understandable by people with learning or cognitive
disabilities, but, in my circles, we have a saying:
"Anything that makes the Web easier for someone with a disability makes it easier for
everyone. "
So, what did the guideline say? It said:
Ensure that documents are clear and simple so they may be more easily understood.
And we explained that by saying:
Consistent page layout, recognizable graphics, and easy to understand language benefit
all users. In particular, they help people with cognitive disabilities or who have difficulty
reading. (However, ensure that images have text equivalents for people who are blind,
have Iow vision, or for any user who cannot or has chosen not to view graphics.)
Using clear and simple language promotes effective communication. Access to written
information can be difficult to impossible for people who have cognitive disabilities,
learning disabilities, or who are deaf. This consideration also applies to the many people
whose first language differs from your own.
So that told us Why to use plain language, but didn't tell us what to do or how to do it. In
the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines, the what-to-dos are described in a series Of
checkpoints that accompany each guideline. The checkpoint in this case states:
Use the clearest and simplest language appropriate for a site's content.
I should point out to you that this is a "Priority I " checkpoint. That means that:
An author must follow this guideline, or one or more groups ofusers will find it
impossible to access information in the document. Implementing this guideline is a basic
requirement for some groups to be able to use Web documents.
All governments or organizations that have adopted the W3C's guidelines as their own
law or policy at least require compliance with all the Priority I checkpoints. The
Government of Canada's "Common Look and Feel Policy", for instance, requires all
Federal Web sites to be compliant with both Priority 1 and Priority 2 checkpoints by
December 31 , 2002. The same is true, I believe, for the Government of Ontario.
Unfortunately, during the period we were developing the guidelines - from 1997 through
1999 - we didnt have any plain language professionals involved. We were obviously
bright enough to know that plain language was important, but we didn't really know what
to tell people. So the best we could say was:
Follow these writing suggestions:
•
Strive for clear and accurate headings and link descriptions. Review every
heading, outline, and menu to see if the crucial words mean exactly what is
intended, and if there are more common words that would convey the same
meaning.
State the topic of the sentence or paragraph at the beginning of the sentence or
paragraph.
Limit each paragraph to one main idea.
Avoid idiomatic language, technical jargon, and other unfamiliar vocabulary and
expressions.
Avoid specialized meanings of familiar vocabulary, unless explanations are
provided.
Avoid the passive voice.
Avoid complex sentence structures.
Make link phrases terse yet meaningful enough so they make sense when read out
of context, alone or as part of a series of links.
A revised version of guidelines included the following advice:
5.1 Writing style
The following writing style suggestions should help make the content of your site easier
to read for everyone, especially people with reading and/or cognitive disabilities. Several
guides (including [HACKER]) discuss these and other writing style issues in more detail.
Strive for clear and accurate headings and link descriptions. This includes using
link phrases that are terse and that make sense when read out of context or as part
of a series of links (Some users browse by jumping from link to link and listening
only to link text.) Use informative headings so that users can scan a page quickly
for information rather than reading it in detail.
State the topic of the sentence or paragraph at the beginning of the sentence or
paragraph (this is called "front-loading"). This will help both people who are
skimming visually, but also people who use speech synthesizers. "Skimming"
with speech currently means that the user jumps from heading to heading, or
paragraph to paragraph and listens to just enough words to determine whether the
current chunk of information (heading, paragraph, link, etc.) interests them. If the
main idea of the paragraph is in the middle or at the end, speech users may have
to listen to most of the document before finding what they want. Depending on
what the user is looking for and how much they know about the topic, search
features may also help users locate content more quickly.
Limit each paragraph to one main idea.
Avoid slang, jargon, and specialized meanings of familiar words, unless defined
within your document.
Favor words that are commonly used. For example, use "begin" rather than
"commence" or use "try" rather than "endeavor."
Use active rather than passive verbs.
Avoid complex sentence structures.
To help determine whether your document is easy to read, consider using the Gunning-
Fog reading measure (described in [SPOOLI with examples and the algorithm online at
[TECHHEAD]). This algorithm generally produces a lower score when content is easier
to read. As example results, the Bible, Shakespeare, Mark Twain, and TV Guide all have
Fog indexes of about 6. Time, Newsweek, and the Wall St. Journal an average Fog index
of about I l.
Summaries and Captions
Many people insist on putting data on the Web in tabular form, Tables are sometimes
incredibly difficult to comprehend. HTML recommends, and provides a method for
including textual summaries and captions for tabular data.
Language tags
Every HTML document is required, by the standard, to provide an indication of the main
language Of the page: English, or French, or German, or whatever. There are special
codes for every language. This element can be used either by the browser to
automatically get you a copy ofa multilingual document in your language ofchoice, or
by certain special applications to do an automatic translation ofa unilingual document
into another language. But beyond that, if you have just a snippet French in an otherwise
English page, you can identify the language of just that snippet. Some future application
might be able to translate snippets on the fly.
Metadata - Information about information
Another way to aid comprehension ofa Web document or Web site is to briefly
summarize its content, and provide a standard set of keywords to better identify its
subjects. This kind of information can be stored in something called metadata, which is
made available on request to things like search engines or specialty browsers. By the
way, I heard someone talking about meta-metadata a little while ago, and I still have the
headache it gave me.
The Future
So, what challenges face us? Well, the most common complaints we hear from Web
developers who have been told to implement the W3C guidelines is that they don't know
what plain language means, that in any case their subject couldn't possibly be made more
understandable, that the audience they eare about does understand and to hell with the
rest of the world, and really who decides what is plain enough language to meet the
standard.
I am pleased to be able to tell you that the working group currently developing the second
version of the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines is trying to address these issues in a
more detailed fashion. They even have a plain language professional involved this time:
Avi Arditti (who is attending this conference), with the Voice of America, has been quite
active in this regard. You can search on the W3C's Web site for more information about
the most recent work in this area. Look at the list-serve archives Of the Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines Working Group for message subjects that contain the subject:
4.1 , or plain language, or natural language. The URL is www.w3.org/WAI/GL There
you can also find links to the latest drafts of the new guidelines and see their progress on
the new plain language checkpoints.