


Constructive and Destructive Team Rules (from McCahan et al, pp. 231-32)
Examples of Constructive Team Rules
• Do not answer cell phones. play games. or work off topic (e.g., social media.
text) during team meetings.
Treat teammates with respect.
Show up on time (the team should decide what "on time" means).
Give each other the benefit of the doubt, unless proven otherwise (especially
in email and other written communication). Always respond constructively to
written communication.
•o If a member breaks the rules, call them on it. This means immediately bringing
it to their attention respectfully and directly.
Let people know if you are in trouble as soon as you know you're in trouble (e.g.,
getting overwhelmed, unable to deliver work on time).
Decide how the team will communicate and how the members will collaborate
on documents (e.g., Google docs. Dropbox. or other file sharing systems).
Answer emails. texts. and phone calls from teammates; decide what is a rea-
sonable response time.
A problem with a member is a team problem. Everyone needs to take respon-
sibility for doing things differently to make the team work. Don't play the blame
game (i.e., it is their problem so they need to fix it). Instead say, "It is our prob-
lern we need to fix it."
All members should ensure that they know what the work expectations are
for an assigned task. and the deadline for that task at the time the work is
assigned. This rule will ensure that people are clear on what they are being
asked to deliver and when. If the team member responsible for section D of the
report thinks this means two paragraphs but everyone else thinks it means two
pages. there is going to be conflict.
Other questions to answer:
If work isNt delivered on time. at what point does the rest of the team take on
the job of doing the person's work for them (and removing their name from the
author list)?
How much warning needs to be given before a team member who is not
responding is cut out of the process?
What are the team's expectations for quality of work? Is everyone striving for
the highest grade possible, or would people be happy just to pass?
What happens if the team rules are broken? What are the penalties? Consider
every problem. such as late for or missing a task. late for or missing a meeting,
not responding to emails. very substandard work, among other issues.
(continued)

Examples of Destructive Team Rules*
If you are late for a team meeting you have to buy everyone a treat.
You can play on your laptop during team meetings if you agree to do more of
the work.
o People who don't get their work done have to wear a hat that says. "I'm a loser
who let my team down."
e If you are 5 minutes late even once for a meeting you have to leave; you are not
allowed to attend the meeting.
Team members should tell each other exactly what they think of them at the
end of each meeting (or publically online).
If a team member delivers inadequate work for one report, they have to do
more of the work on the next report.
The team leader is responsible for cleening up any team messes and rewriting
anything that is poorly written.
If a member doesn't deliver their work at least 2 hours before a deadline, then
the rest of the team is responsible for writing the missing sections. (This is a
bad rule because 2 hours is not nearly enough time for the team to remediate
the situation. It isn't fair to the team.)
Team meetings are optional for people who finish their part of the work early.
*Adapted from actual team rules that we have seen undergraduate design teams
try to use.